# Covid-19 and its Effect on the Financial Field In-Class Essay

This article discusses the ways in which new datasets and data science methods related to Covid-19 have affected certain fields today. Though not explicitly stated in the article, one field that has been substantially affected by the pandemic is the field of finance. One prevalent change in the financial field is the transition to remote work. With remote work, greenhouse emissions are much lower, and people can spend time more with their families that would overwise have been limited due to in-person work. A con related to remote working includes the loss of the camaraderie from physical, face-to- face interactions. Physical interactions with clients, managers, and colleagues are crucial in a field of study like finance but the pandemic has stripped people of these interactions. The loss of communication that results prevent employees from getting their work done, decreasing the overall efficiency of a company. Even though society uses platforms like zoom to cope, this is not the same as in-person learning. Given that company efficiency is at stake, I believe it is crucial for companies to make the transition back into in-person work as soon as possible. Another prevalent change is the vacancy of office spaces. Office spaces are meant to be worked in, meaning that aside from maybe serving as storage spaces, the pandemic has basically made the workplaces useless. Therefore, it is all the more important for people to return to in-person working as soon as possible. 
