# Facebook's Deletion of Facial-recognition Data In-Class Essay

This article discusses the recent move by Meta (formally Facebook) to shut down its facial-recognition system and its corresponding database of more than 1 billion people after receiving complaints on data privacy. Personally speaking, I do approve companies’ utilization of this facial- recognition technology to a certain extent because I see this as a piece of technology that provides great innovation, when used properly. For example, the article mentions that Meta uses this technology to identify people in photos and allow the user to have automatic assess to tag suggestions, making the technology more convenient and user-friendly. Aside from social media, facial-recognition technology can be used to track criminals via street cameras, provide an extra source of security when entering a building, and even replace passwords on any device. Though on the surface, this technology provides convenience, it is prone to issues of data privacy. The constitutional amendments continually allude to a to a person’s right to individual privacy, so it is important for companies to recognize this and to provide ways to not completely mitigate the use of this technology but rather to find consent. In the case of Meta, to prevent this data privacy crisis they are in, they could have asked for user consent when they first implemented this technology as opposed to directly implementing this technology regardless of harmful effects for the sake of profit. As for as government regulation goes, I believe it is important for them to set up regulations that force all companies to ask users for consent as it relates to facial recognition technology, meaning that companies can’t use this technology on a user if the user fails to provide consent. Additionally, though companies today do provide forms of consent on terms and conditions, most people don’t read this. In other words, the government ought to promote forms of consent in which people knowingly consent.  By doing so, the government will be able to create a more open-minded society. 
